## Insect team read me
TODO: format this and add more detail, description of each file

*File manifest* (will move to end later)
* ypm_ct_ent_taxo_summaries_20250418.csv: datasheet with species richness for all insects (total_richness), Lepidoptera (butterflies), Coleoptera (beetles), Nymphalidae (brush footed butterflies), Papilionidae (swallowtail butterflies), Apidae (bees), and Noctuidae (owlet moths) from 1900-2024.

Project statement: 
Butterflies (Nymphalidae insect family) beyond being beautful creatures are major pollinators of the world’s wild and domesticated 
flowering plants, and all stages of their life cycle are important in food security and ecosystem stability. Alarmed by the decreasing 
number of butterflies and the ever increasing climate change impacts, we are very concerned about the future. Hence, we seek to examine 
the relationship between some climatic factors -specifically temperature and precipitation- and the distribution of Nymphalidae speciess 
across U.S. states over the past 50 years.



Hypothesis:
Changes in temperature and precipitation over the past 50 years have significantly influenced the distribution and population density of Nymphalidae species across U.S. states.


Possible Research Questions (to select important ones):
How have changes in temperature across U.S. states over time affected the appearance and distribution of the Nymphalidae insect species? (start with CT and go from there)
How have changes in precipitation across U.S. states over time affected the appearance and distribution of the Nymphalidae insect species? (start with CT and go from there)
How has the geographic distribution of specific insect (Nymphalidae) orders or families changed across U.S. states over time?
Which U.S. states have recorded the highest occurrences of Nymphalidae species over time?
Has the geographic range of Nymphalidae species shifted northward or to higher elevations over the past 50 years?
Are seasonal patterns in Nymphalidae sightings (e.g., months or weeks) shifting over the decades?
Which (or Nymphalidae) insect taxa have shown the greatest expansion or decline in observed counts over time?
Which states might require urgent biodiversity conservation based on declining insect (Nymphalidae) counts or species?
Is there a correlation between coordinate uncertainty and biodiversity in under-sampled regions?
Which U.S. states show the most taxonomic diversity per unit area—and how should this guide conservation funding?
How do year-to-year variations in average temperature and precipitation correlate with Nymphalidae abundance in each state? (With can join our data to an external climate and temperature data)
Are hotter or drier states experiencing a faster decline in Nymphalidae species diversity?
Do extreme weather years (very hot or dry) show significant drops in Nymphalidae counts or diversity?



Datasets: 
Entomology: https://www.gbif.org/dataset/96404cc2-f762-11e1-a439-00145eb45e9a/activity
NOAA: https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/cdo-web/datasets
Link to Google Doc: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1qb_u7YNPmGLWlOS4u_9a4-hSig6mMN954YvEJOMVJAU/edit?usp=sharing
